Bakkar N-MZ, Mougharbil N, Mroueh A et al.

Worsening baroreflex sensitivity on progression to type 2 diabetes: localized vs. systemic inflammation and role of antidiabetic therapy.

Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2020 319, E835-E851.

Cardiac autonomic neuropathy (CAN) is an early cardiovascular manifestation of type 2 diabetes (T2D) that constitutes an independent risk factor for cardiovascular mortality and morbidity. Nevertheless, its underlying pathophysiology remains poorly understood. We recently showed that localized perivascular adipose tissue (PVAT) inflammation underlies the incidence of parasympathetic CAN in prediabetes. Here, we extend our investigation to provide a mechanistic framework for the evolution of autonomic impairment as the metabolic insult worsens. Early metabolic dysfunction was induced in rats fed a mild hypercaloric diet. Two low-dose streptozotocin injections were used to evoke a state of late decompensated T2D. Cardiac autonomic function was assessed by invasive measurement of baroreflex sensitivity using the vasoactive method. Progression into T2D was associated with aggravation of CAN to include both sympathetic and parasympathetic arms. Unlike prediabetic rats, T2D rats showed markers of brainstem neuronal injury and inflammation as well as increased serum levels of IL-1β. Experiments on PC12 cells differentiated into sympathetic-like neurons demonstrated that brainstem injury observed in T2D rats resulted from exposure to possible proinflammatory mediators in rat serum rather than a direct effect of the altered metabolic profile. CAN and the associated cardiovascular damage in T2D only responded to combined treatment with insulin to manage hyperglycemia in addition to a nonhypoglycemic dose of metformin or pioglitazone providing an anti-inflammatory effect, coincident with the effect of these combinations on serum IL-1β. Our present results indicate that CAN worsening upon progression to T2D involves brainstem inflammatory changes likely triggered by systemic inflammation.
