AlOlaiwi LA, AlHarbi TJ, Tourkmani AM.

Prevalence of cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy and gastroparesis symptoms among patients with type 2 diabetes who attend a primary health care center.

PLoS One 2018 13, e0209500.

INTRODUCTION: Cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy (CAN) and gastroparesis are two types of diabetic autonomic neuropathy which could affect patients’ quality of life and carry significant morbidity and mortality outcomes. The aim of this study was to estimate the prevalence and risk factors of both CAN and gastroparesis symptoms among patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) at primary health care level. METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted among 400 adults with T2DM from April 1, 2017 to March 20, 2018. CAN was defined by the presence of any of the followings: resting tachycardia, orthostatic hypotension or prolonged corrected QT interval in the electrocardiogram. Gastroparesis symptoms were assessed using a validated questionnaire: the Gastroparesis Cardinal Symptom Index. RESULTS: The mean age of study participants and disease duration were 55.26 ± 10.65 years and 10.77 ± 6.89 years, respectively. CAN was present in 15.3% of the participants. Hypertension, smoking, antihypertensive use, body mass index, dyslipidemia and albuminuria were significantly higher in participants with CAN than those without CAN (p<0.05). Prolonged disease duration (p = 0.007) and hypertension (p = 0.004) were independently associated with CAN. Gastroparesis symptoms were present in 6.3% of study participants and were significantly associated with those of female gender (P<0.05). Metformin use emerged as an independent predictor of the presence of at least one symptom (p = 0.001). CONCLUSION: Among Saudi adults with T2DM at primary care level, the prevalence of CAN is significant and is independently related to disease duration and hypertension, indicating the importance of CAN screening, especially for those with prolonged disease duration, and the importance of controlling blood pressure in order to prevent CAN or its consequences. The prevalence of gastroparesis symptoms is 6% and is independently related to metformin use, and therefore, symptomatic screening is required to decide which patients need further evaluation.
