Xing L, Peng F, Liang Q et al.

Clinical Characteristics and Risk of Diabetic Complications in Data-Driven Clusters Among Type 2 Diabetes.

Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2021 12, 617628.

BACKGROUND: This study aimed to cluster newly diagnosed patients and patients with long-term diabetes and to explore the clinical characteristics, risk of diabetes complications, and medication treatment related to each cluster. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: K-means clustering analysis was performed on 1,060 Chinese patients with type 2 diabetes based on five variables (HbA1c, age at diagnosis, BMI, HOMA2-IR, and HOMA2-B). The clinical features, risk of diabetic complications, and the utilization of elven types of medications agents related to each cluster were evaluated with the chi-square test and the Tukey-Kramer method. RESULTS: Four replicable clusters were identified, severe insulin-resistant diabetes (SIRD), severe insulin-deficient diabetes (SIDD), mild obesity-related diabetes (MOD), and mild age-related diabetes (MARD). In terms of clinical characteristics, there were significant differences in blood pressure, renal function, and lipids among clusters. Furthermore, individuals in SIRD had the highest prevalence of stages 2 and 3 chronic kidney disease (CKD) (57%) and diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN) (67%), while individuals in SIDD had the highest risk of diabetic retinopathy (32%), albuminuria (31%) and lower extremity arterial disease (LEAD) (13%). Additionally, the difference in medication treatment of clusters were observed in metformin (p = 0.012), α-glucosidase inhibitor (AGI) (p = 0.006), dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitor (DPP-4) (p = 0.017), glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) (p <0.001), insulin (p <0.001), and statins (p = 0.006). CONCLUSIONS: The newly diagnosed patients and patients with long-term diabetes can be consistently clustered into featured clusters. Each cluster had significantly different patient characteristics, risk of diabetic complications, and medication treatment.
