Pierce DA, Holt SR, Reeves-Daniel A.

A probable case of gabapentin-related reversible hearing loss in a patient with acute renal failure.

Clin Ther 2008 30, 1681-1684.

BACKGROUND: As described in the literature, gabapentin toxicity in patients with impaired renal function can manifest as coma, myoclonus, tremulousness, or altered mental status. Gabapentin is an antiepileptic agent indicated for use as an adjunct therapy in partial seizures and postherpetic neuralgia but is also prescribed for the treatment of diabetic peripheral neuropathy. CASE SUMMARY: A 46-year-old white woman (height, 167 cm; weight, 177 kg; body mass index, 62.8 kg/m2) with a 6-year history of diabetes mellitus and previously normal renal function, presented to the emergency department of Wake Forest University Baptist Medical Center with anuria (a serum creatinine level of 7.4 mg/dL), hearing loss, myoclonus, and confusion with hallucinations lasting for 3 days. Her blood pressure was 110/74 mm Hg. The patient’s preadmit medication list included: lisinopril (40 mg QD), hydrochlorothiazide (25 mg QD), and furosemide (80 mg QD) for hypertension; atorvastatin (10 mg QD) for hyperlipidemia; omeprazole (20 mg QD) for gastroesophageal reflux disease; salmeterol/fluticasone inhaler (100/50 microg; 1 puff BID) and albuterol metered-dose inhaler (90 microg as needed) for asthma; metformin (500 mg BID) and insulin lispro per sliding scale for type 2 diabetes mellitus; oxycodone controlled release (60 mg TID) for chronic osteoarthritis and low back pain; alprazolam (0.5 mg every 8 hours as needed) for generalized anxiety disorder; venlafaxine (150 mg BID) for depression; and gabapentin (300 mg TID) for diabetic peripheral neuropathy. The patient’s symptoms (hearing loss, myoclonus, and confusion) improved after 1 session of hemodialysis (approximately 10 hours following admission) and had resolved at the time of discharge (4 days later). On admission, the gabapentin concentration was 17.6 microg/mL, and following hemodialysis, the gabapentin concentration was undetectable (by discharge/day 4). The timing of the patient’s last dose of gabapentin is unknown. Normal doses for the treatment of diabetic peripheral neuropathy range from 900 to 3600 mg/d divided 3 times daily. CONCLUSIONS: We report a patient with acute renal failure who developed hearing loss, myoclonus, and confusion with hallucinations in the presence of elevated gabapentin concentrations. Due to rapid improvement after hemodialysis and discontinuation of gabapentin, we believe that these symptoms were probably due to gabapentin toxicity.
