Ludman T, Melemedjian OK.

Bortezomib and metformin opposingly regulate the expression of hypoxia-inducible factor alpha and the consequent development of chemotherapy-induced painful peripheral neuropathy.

Mol Pain 2019 15, 1744806919850043.

Chemotherapy-induced painful peripheral neuropathy is a significant clinical problem that is associated with widely used chemotherapeutics. Unfortunately, the molecular mechanisms by which chemotherapy-induced painful peripheral neuropathy develops have remained elusive. The proteasome inhibitor, bortezomib, has been shown to induce aerobic glycolysis in sensory neurons. This altered metabolic phenotype leads to the extrusion of metabolites which sensitize primary afferents and cause pain. Hypoxia-inducible factor alpha is a transcription factor that is known to reprogram cellular metabolism. Furthermore, hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha protein is constantly synthesized and undergoes proteasomal degradation in normal conditions. However, metabolic stress or hypoxia stabilizes the expression of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha leading to the transcription of genes that reprogram cellular metabolism. This study demonstrates that treatment of mice with bortezomib stabilizes the expression of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha. Moreover, knockdown of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha, inhibition of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha binding to its response element, or limiting its translation by using metformin prevent the development of bortezomib-induced neuropathic pain. Strikingly, the blockade of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha expression does not attenuate mechanical allodynia in mice with existing bortezomib-induced neuropathic pain. These results establish the stabilization of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha expression as the molecular mechanism by which bortezomib initiates chemotherapy-induced painful peripheral neuropathy. Crucially, these findings reveal that the initiation and maintenance of bortezomib-induced neuropathic pain are regulated by distinct mechanisms.
